SIMD-0177: Program Runtime ABI v2 (#177)
solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents: proposals/0177-program-runtime-abiv2.md

field.

### The serialization interface

- Writing to readonly accounts fails the transaction, even if the exact same
data is written as already is there, thus even if no change occurs.
- The is-executable-flag is never set.
- The next rent collection epoch is not serialized.
- Readonly instruction accounts have no growth capacity.
- For writable instruction accounts additional capacity is allocated and mapped
for potential account growth. The maximum capacity is the length of the account
payload at the beginning of the transaction plus 10 KiB. CPI can not grow
beyond what the caller allowed as top-level instructions limit the potential
growth. Thus it makes sense to preallocate this capacity in the beginning of
the transaction when the writable accounts are copied in case the transaction
needs to be rolled back.

### The serialization layout

The following memory regions must be mapped into the virtual machine,
each starting at a 4 GiB boundary in virtual address space:

- Writable header:
  - Magic: `u32`: `0x76494241` ("ABIv" encoded in ASCII)
  - ABI version `u32`: `0x00000002`
  - Pointer to instruction data: `u64`

>   - Length of instruction data: `u32`

Reviewer: I was thinking about this and I thought that if data was presented in a way which makes sense to rust, e.g. regular slices with `u64` ptr and `u64` length, then rust programs do not have to do any entry processing at all, and can just cast 4GiB address to a type and be done.

account data copy paths:

- Serialization: Copy from program runtime (host) to virtual machine (guest)
- CPI call: Copy from virtual machine (guest) to program runtime (host)
- CPI return: Copy from program runtime (host) to virtual machine (guest)
- Deserialization: Copy from virtual machine (guest) to program runtime (host)

To avoid this a feature named "direct mapping" was designed which uses the
address translation logic of the virtual machine to emulate the serialization
and deserialization without actually performing copies.

Implementing direct mapping in the current ABI v0 and v1 was deemed to complex
because of unaligned virtual memory regions and memory accesses overlapping
multiple virtual memory regions. Instead the layout of the virtual address
space should be adjusted so that all virtual memory regions are aligned to
4 GiB.

## Alternatives Considered

What alternative designs were considered and what pros/cons does this feature
have relative to them?

## New Terminology

None.

## Detailed Design

SDKs will have to support both ABI v1 and v2 for a transition period. The
program runtime must only use ABI v2 if all programs in a transaction support

> it. Programs signal their support through their SBPF version field (TBD) while

Reviewer: |  The program runtime must only use ABI v2 if all programs in a transaction support it.

Why this restriction? It's possible to execute some programs with direct mapping and others without in the same transaction.

Author: Yes, technically the restriction could be relaxed to withing the CPI tree of one top-level instruction.

Reviewer: My point is: why prevent caller and callee from having different ABI versions. 

I meant to say that it is possible to execute some programs with direct mapping and some without, within the same instruction/CPI tree.

Author: Our implementation of direct mapping is explicitly built on the assumption that caller and callee both use or not use direct mapping. Mixing them would lead to trouble e.g. in account payload reallocation.

the program runtime signals which ABI is chosen through the serialized magic

> filed.

Reviewer 2: typo?
```suggestion
field.
```

### The serialization interface

- Writing to readonly accounts fails the transaction, even if the exact same
data is written as already is there, thus even if no change occurs.
- The is-executable-flag is never set.
- The next rent collection epoch is not serialized.
- Readonly instruction accounts get no growth padding.
- For writable instruction accounts additional capacity is allocated and mapped
for potential account growth. The maximum capacity is the length of the account

> payload at the beginning of the transaction plus 10 KiB. CPI can not grow

Reviewer 2: does this get affected by this other SIMD?
https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/163/files

Author: They are independent. SIMD-0163 is about the program being called, that is not affected in this SIMD.

Reviewer 3: @nickfrosty Fwiw, this means the `realloc` limit is unchanged.

https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/489f483e1d7b30ef114e0123994818b2accfa389/sdk/account-info/src/lib.rs#L17

Author: We could increase the account realloc / resize limit if there are no interactions of ABI v0/v1 and ABI v2 programs in the CPI call tree of a top level instruction. See the discussion with Sean below.

beyond what the caller allowed as top-level instructions limit the potential
growth. Thus it makes sense to preallocate this capacity in the beginning of
the transaction when the writable accounts are copyied in case the transaction
needs to be rolled back.

### The serialization layout

The following memory regions must be mapped into the virtual machine,
each starting at a 4 GiB boundary in virtual address space:

- Writable header:

>   - Magic: `u32`: `0x41424976`

Reviewer 4: What is this for?

Author: For programs to differentiate it from ABI v0 and v1. See "Backwards Compatibility".

---
simd: '0177'
title: Program Runtime ABI v2
authors:
  - Alexander Meißner
category: Standard
type: Core
status: Draft
created: 2024-10-01
feature: TBD
---

## Summary

Align the layout of the virtual address space to large pages in order to avoid
account data copies while maintaining a simple address translation logic.

## Motivation

At the moment all validator implementations have to copy (and compare) data in
and out of the virtual memory of the virtual machine. There are four possible
account data copy paths:

- Serialization: Copy from program runtime (host) to virtual machine (guest)
- CPI call: Copy from virtual machine (guest) to program runtime (host)
- CPI return: Copy from program runtime (host) to virtual machine (guest)
- Deserialization: Copy from virtual machine (guest) to program runtime (host)

To avoid this a feature named "direct mapping" was designed which uses the
address translation logic of the virtual machine to emulate the serialization
and deserialization without actually performing copies.

> Implementing direct mapping in the current ABI v0 and v1 was deemed to complex

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Implementing direct mapping in the current ABI v0 and v1 was deemed too complex
```

- CPI call edge: Copy from virtual machine (guest) to program runtime (host)
- CPI return edge: Copy from program runtime (host) to virtual machine (guest)
- Deserialization: Copy from virtual machine (guest) to program runtime (host)

To avoid this a feature named "direct mapping" was designed which uses the
address translation logic of the virtual machine to emulate the serialization
and deserialization without actually performing copies.

Implementing direct mapping in the current ABI v0 and v1 is very complex
because of unaligned virtual memory regions and memory accesses overlapping
multiple virtual memory regions. Instead the layout of the virtual address
space should be adjusted so that all virtual memory regions are aligned to
4 GiB.

## Alternatives Considered

None.

## New Terminology

None.

## Detailed Design

Programs signal their support through their SBPF version field being v4 or
above while the program runtime signals which ABI is chosen through the
serialized magic field.

### Per Transaction Serialization

At the beginning of a transaction the program runtime must prepare the
following which is shared by all instructions running programs suporting the

> new ABI. This memory region starts at `0x400000000` and is readonly. It must be

Reviewer 6: Is this the memory region for the accounts? It is not clear by this sentence what is the purpose of this memory region.

I'm assuming it is, since the region for the scratchpad is the 0x5.

Author: > At the beginning of a transaction the program runtime must prepare the
following

That means the stuff below which is the scratchpad and the transaction accounts.

Reviewer 6: The paragraph is difficult to understand, because you say `This memory region` without previously mentioning one. That was the source of my confusion. What do you think of this other version?

> At the beginning of a transaction the program runtime must prepare a read-only memory region starting at `0x400000000`, which is shared by all instructions running programs that support the new ABI. Throughout the transaction, it must be updated as instructions modify the account metadata or the scratchpad via `sol_set_return_data`. This memory region must contain:

updated as instructions through out the transaction modify the account metadata
or the scratchpad via `sol_set_return_data`.

- Key of the program which wrote to the scratchpad most recently: `[u8; 32]`
- The scratchpad data: `&[u8]` which is composed of:
  - Pointer to scratchpad data: `u64`
  - Length of scratchpad data: `u64`
- The number of transaction accounts: `u64`
- For each transaction account:
  - Key: `[u8; 32]`
  - Owner: `[u8; 32]`

>   - Lamports: `u64`

Reviewer 6: After a couple of discussions with @Lichtso, we thought the feedback from developer relations would be important here.

Today programs can only see the accounts passed to them in the instruction being executed. This layout change entails that programs (and every CPIs program invoked from them) will now be able to access metadata from all the accounts passed in the transaction, regardless whether they were passed in the instruction or not. We still intend to maintain the account payload hidden, though, if it is not an instruction account.

Would this change have any unintended on the developer side?

(cc. @joncinque and @jacobcreech )

  - Account payload: `&[u8]` which is composed of:
    - Pointer to account payload: `u64`

>     - Account payload length: `u64`

Reviewer 6: Programs also have access to the booleans writable, signer and executable. Are we serializing these ones as well?

Author: These are per instruction not per transaction. See the "flags bitfield" in "Per Instruction Serialization".

A readonly memory region starting at `0x500000000` must be mapped in for the
scratchpad data. It must be updated when `sol_set_return_data` is called.

### Per Instruction Serialization

For each instruction the program runtime must prepare the following.
This memory region starts at `0x600000000` and is readonly. It does not require
any updates once serialized.

- The instruction data: `&[u8]` which is composed of:
  - Pointer to instruction data: `u64`
  - Length of instruction data: `u64`

> - Programm account index in transaction: `u16`

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Program account index in transaction: `u16`
```

- Number of instruction accounts: `u16`
- For each instruction account:
  - Index to transaction account: `u16`

>   - Flags bitfield: `u16` (bit 0 is signer, bit 1 is writable)

Reviewer 6: Can this be a `u8`?

Author: Then we would have one byte padding to reach alignment, so I don't see any reason to do so.
Or did you mean splitting the array of structs into two separate arrays?

### Per Instruction Mappings

A readonly memory region starting at `0x700000000` must be mapped
in for the instruction data. It too does not require any updates.

For each unique (meaning deduplicated) instruction account the payload must

> be mapped in at `0x800000000` plus `0x100000000` times the index of the

Reviewer 6: The instruction data address, the scratchpad address, and the payload for each account reside in well-known addresses, but we are still serializing them in the instruction and the transaction area. How about we provide the transaction area address `0x400000000` and the instruction area address `0x600000000` in registers so that they would be arguments for the new entrypoint function in the SDK?

This setting would be more consistent with the approach not to hardcode the other addresses in the program SDK.

**transaction** account (not the index of the instruction account). Only if the
instruction account has the writable flag set and is owned by the current
program it is mapped in as a writable region. The writability of a region must
be updated as programs through out the transaction modify the account metadata.

### Lazy deserialization on the dApp side (inside the SDK)

With this design a program SDK can (but no longer needs to) eagerly deserialize
all account metadata at the entrypoint. Because this layout is strictly aligned
and uses proper arrays, it is possible to directly calculate the offset of a
single accounts metadata with only one indirect lookup and no need to scan all
preceeding metadata. This allows a program SDK to offer a lazy interface which
only interacts with the account metadata fields which are needed, only of the
accounts which are of interest and only when necessary.

### Changes to syscalls

The `AccountInfo` parameter of the CPI syscalls (`sol_invoke_signed_c` and
`sol_invoke_signed_rust`) will be ignored if ABI v2 is in use. Instead the
changes to account metadata will be communicated explicitly through separate

> syscalls `sol_set_account_owner`, `sol_set_account_lamports` and

Reviewer 7: Perhaps we need to mention the expected cost of `sol_set_account_lamports` to update lamports of an account – this is a quite common operation in programs.

`sol_set_account_length`. Each of these must take a guest pointer to the
structure of the transaction account (see per transaction serialization) to be
updated and the new value as second parameter. In case of the pubkey parameter
the guest pointer to a 32 byte slice is taken instead.

### Changes to CU metering

CPI will no longer charge CUs for the length of account payloads. Instead TBD
CUs will be charged for every instruction account.

## Impact

This change is expected to drastically reduce the CU costs as the cost will no
longer depend on the length of the instruction account payloads or instruction
data.

> From the dApp devs perspective almost all changes are hidden inside the SDK.

Reviewer 7: I am not sure we can hide the need for `sol_set_account_lamports` in the SDK. It might also be the case that CUs to update lamports will increase.

space should be adjusted so that all virtual memory regions are aligned to
4 GiB.

## Alternatives Considered

None.

## New Terminology

None.

## Detailed Design

Programs signal their support through their SBPF version field being v4 or
above while the program runtime signals which ABI is chosen through the
serialized magic field.

### Per Transaction Serialization

At the beginning of a transaction the program runtime must prepare the
following which is shared by all instructions running programs suporting the
new ABI. This memory region starts at `0x400000000` and is readonly. It must be
updated as instructions through out the transaction modify the account metadata
or the scratchpad via `sol_set_return_data`.

- Key of the program which wrote to the scratchpad most recently: `[u8; 32]`
- The scratchpad data: `&[u8]` which is composed of:
  - Pointer to scratchpad data: `u64`
  - Length of scratchpad data: `u64`
- The number of transaction accounts: `u64`
- For each transaction account:
  - Key: `[u8; 32]`
  - Owner: `[u8; 32]`
  - Lamports: `u64`
  - Account payload: `&[u8]` which is composed of:
    - Pointer to account payload: `u64`

>     - Account payload length: `u64`

Reviewer 6: If we are not mapping the payload for all accounts in the transaction, could we move the payload pointer and length to the instruction area? It would be a little inconvenient to offer developers a slice that causes an access violation when they try to access it, in the case of an account without its payload mapped to the virtual machine.

The account parameters are guest pointers to the structure of the transaction
accounts (see per transaction serialization).

### Changes to CU metering

CPI will no longer charge CUs for the length of account payloads. Instead TBD
CUs will be charged for every instruction account. Also TBD CUs will be charged
for the three new account metadata updating syscalls.

## Impact

This change is expected to drastically reduce the CU costs as the cost will no
longer depend on the length of the instruction account payloads or instruction
data.

From the dApp devs perspective almost all changes are hidden inside the SDK.

## Security Considerations

What security implications/considerations come with implementing this feature?
Are there any implementation-specific guidance or pitfalls?

## Drawbacks

This will require parallel code paths for serialization, deserialization, CPI
call edges and CPI return edges. All of these will coexist with the exisiting
ABI v0 and v1 for the forseeable future, until we decide to deprecate them.

## Backwards Compatibility

The magic field (`u32`) and version field (`u32`) of ABI v2 are placed at the

> beginning, where ABI v0 and v1 would otherwise indicate the number of

Reviewer 6: At the beginning of where? The transaction area?

must NOT be mapped.

### Instruction payload area

For each instruction, the runtime must map its payload at address 
`0x10800000000` plus `0x100000000` times the index of the instruction in the 
trasaction. All instruction payload mappings are readonly.

One extra writable mapping must be created after the last instruction payload 
area to be the CPI scratch pad, i.e. at address `0x10800000000` plus 
`0x100000000` times the number of instructions in the transaction. Its purpose 
is for programs to write CPI instruction data directly to it and avoid copies.

### VM initialization

During the initilization of the virtual machine, the runtime must load the 
value `0x400000000` in register `R1` and value `0x600000000` in register `R2`. 
These values represent addresses for programs to easily find the areas to read 
information about the transaction and the instructions.

### Changes to syscalls

Changes to the account metadata must now be communicated with specific 
syscalls, as detailed below:

- `sol_resize_account`: Dst account, new length as `u64`
- `sol_assign_owner`: Dst account, new owner as `&[u8; 32]`

> - `sol_transfer_lamports`: Dst account, src account, amount as `u64`

Reviewer 7: Wonder if having "transfer" on the name here could create confusion with "transfer" in the system program – most likely not, but we could consider naming this as `sol_move_lamports`.

Author: It does the same thing as "Transfer" of the system program. But there is no risk of accidentally using the wrong one, because this one only works for accounts owned by the current program and the system program one only works for accounts owned by the system program.

Reviewer 7: I was just thinking in a different name to emphasize that one is "lower" level than the other – e.g., the system program could implement its "Transfer" instruction using the `sol_move_lamports` syscall. The "move" one (probably?) does not require a signer check, since it can only move lamports out of accounts owned by the current program. But this is totally cosmetic.

The account parameters are the index of the account in the transaction.

Changes to the account payload length and all the scratchpads sections 
introduced in this SIMD (the return-data scratchpad and the CPI scratchpad) 
must be communicated via a new sycall `set_buffer_length`, with the following 
parameters:

- Address of region to be resized: `u64`
- New length of region: `u64`

The syscall must check if the address belongs to either a writable account 
payload or one of the scratchpads and return and error otherwise. Constrains 
for the maximum resizable limits must also be verified (10 kb).

The verifier must reject SBPFv4 programs containing the `sol_invoke_signed_c` 
and `sol_invoke_signed_rust`, since they are not compatible with ABIv2. A new 
syscall `sol_invoke_signed_v2` must replace them. The parameters for 
`sol_invoke_signed_v2` are the following:

> - Index in transaction of program ID to be called: `u64`.

Reviewer 7: Could this be a reference to the program id, as it is now? Otherwise it seems that a program will need to lookup the index for the callee program.

Reviewer 6: Programs will have access to an array containing all accounts in the transaction. They will be aware of the index of the accounts the instruction is referring to. Having said that, the index is easily accessible and easier to manage.

- A slice `&[InstructionAccount]`, with each element `InstructionAccount` 
  containing, as previously mentioned:

>   - Index to transaction account: `u16`

Reviewer 7: Same here, could this be a reference to the account address to avoid the index lookup, as it is now? Or is this index easily accessible?

Author: Indices are cheaper to compare and avoid a key search in the program runtime during CPI. Thus we want to avoid using `Pubkey`.

Reviewer 7: Yeah, totally agree with that. Just checking that we are not pushing this "cost" to the program. It seems that we are going to be ok, since the index is available on the `InstructionAccount` - assuming program accounts for CPI will be there as well.

Reviewer 6: > assuming program accounts for CPI will be there as well.

Yes, you can only CPI a program if you pass on its account in the transaction.

- Per instruction deserialization after a program runs could be removed too
- Deserialization inside the dApp could be reduced to a minimum
- programs would only have to pay for what they use, not having to deserialize
all instruction accounts which were passed in
- Scanning sibling instructions would not require a syscall
- Memory regions (and thus address translation) which SIMD-0219 made unaligned
could be aligned (to 4 GiB) again

All of these however do necessitate a major change in the layout how the
program runtime and programs interface (ABI).

## Alternatives Considered

None.

## New Terminology

None.

## Detailed Design

Programs signal that they expect ABIv2 through their SBPF version field being
v4 or above.

### Memory Regions

#### Transaction area

At the beginning of a transaction the program runtime must prepare a 
readonly memory region starting at `0x400000000`. This region is shared by all 
instructions running programs with support to new ABI. It must be updated as
as instructions through out the transaction modify the account metadata, the
CPI scratchpad or the return data. The contents of this memory region are the

> following:

Author: So far we are exposing more info about the current transaction and instructions. The things you listed are more global and already exposed via sysvars, no?

must NOT be mapped.

### Instruction payload area

For each instruction, the runtime must map its payload at address 
`0x10800000000` plus `0x100000000` times the index of the instruction in the 
trasaction. All instruction payload mappings are readonly.

One extra writable mapping must be created after the last instruction payload 
area to be the CPI scratch pad, i.e. at address `0x10800000000` plus 
`0x100000000` times the number of instructions in the transaction. Its purpose 
is for programs to write CPI instruction data directly to it and avoid copies.

### VM initialization

During the initilization of the virtual machine, the runtime must load the 
value `0x400000000` in register `R1` and value `0x600000000` in register `R2`. 
These values represent addresses for programs to easily find the areas to read 
information about the transaction and the instructions.

### Changes to syscalls

Changes to the account metadata must now be communicated with specific 
syscalls, as detailed below:

- `sol_resize_account`: Dst account, new length as `u64`
- `sol_assign_owner`: Dst account, new owner as `&[u8; 32]`

> - `sol_transfer_lamports`: Dst account, src account, amount as `u64`

Reviewer 6: Yes, `sol_resize_account` can be removed. I forgot to take it out.

programs with support for ABIv2, and must be updated as instruction modify the 
metadata with the provided syscalls (see the `Changes to syscalls` section).
The contents for this region are as follow:

- For each transaction account:
  - Key: `[u8; 32]`
  - Owner: `[u8; 32]`
  - Lamports: `u64`
  - Account payload: `&[u8]` which is composed of:
    - Pointer to account payload: `u64`
    - Account payload length: `u64`

#### Instruction area

For each transction, the program runtime must also preapre two memory regions. 
The first one is a readonly region starting at `0x600000000`. It must be 
updated at each CPI call edge. The contents of this region are the following:

- For each instruction in transaction:
  - Index in transaction of program account to be executed: `u64`
  - CPI nesting level: `u16`
  - Index of parent instruction (`u16::MAX` for top-level instructions): `u16`
  - Reference to a slice of instruction accounts `&[InstructionAccount]`, 
    consisting of:
    - Pointer to beginning of slice: `u64` (points to the `0x700000000` 
      region)
    - Number of elements in slice: `u64`
  - Instruction data `&[u8]`, which is composed of:
    - Pointer to data: `u64`

>     - Length of data: `u64`

Reviewer 6: I initially devised the deduplication map (i.e. a map from index_in_transaction to index_in_instruction) to be runtime only, since that was the only place we cared about account deduplication. Today the SDK adds duplicate accounts to the AccountInfo array, so I'm not sure programs distinguish them.

Maybe @febo can have a broader opinion.

all accounts in the transaction. It is shared by all instructions running 
programs with support for ABIv2, and must be updated as instruction modify the 
metadata with the provided syscalls (see the `Changes to syscalls` section).
The contents for this region are as follow:

- For each transaction account:
  - Key: `[u8; 32]`
  - Owner: `[u8; 32]`
  - Lamports: `u64`
  - Account payload: `&[u8]` which is composed of:
    - Pointer to account payload: `u64`
    - Account payload length: `u64`

#### Instruction area

For each transction, the program runtime must also preapre two memory regions. 
The first one is a readonly region starting at `0x600000000`. It must be 
updated at each CPI call edge. The contents of this region are the following:

- For each instruction in transaction:
  - Index in transaction of program account to be executed: `u64`
  - CPI nesting level: `u16`
  - Index of parent instruction (`u16::MAX` for top-level instructions): `u16`
  - Reference to a slice of instruction accounts `&[InstructionAccount]`, 
    consisting of:
    - Pointer to beginning of slice: `u64` (points to the `0x700000000` 
      region)

>     - Number of elements in slice: `u64`

Reviewer 6: Good point. We might as well use `u64` or two `u32` for them.

>     - Number of elements in slice: `u64`

Reviewer 6: Fixed in https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/177/commits/fab4724c659e037c8b30b063002054a8cba6ccad

#### Return data scratchpad

A writable memory region starting at `0x800000000` must be mapped in for the
return-data scratchpad.

### Accounts area

For each unique (meaning deduplicated) instruction account the payload must
be mapped in at `0x900000000` plus `0x100000000` times the index of the
**transaction** account (not the index of the instruction account). Only if the
instruction account has the writable flag set and is owned by the current
program it is mapped in as a writable region. The writability of a region must
be updated as programs through out the transaction modify the account metadata.

The runtime must only map the payload for accounts that belong in the current
executing instruction. The payload for accounts belonging to sibling instructions
must NOT be mapped.

### Instruction payload area

For each instruction, the runtime must map its payload at address 
`0x10900000000` plus `0x100000000` times the index of the instruction in the 
trasaction. All instruction payload mappings are readonly.

One extra writable mapping must be created after the last instruction payload 
area to be the CPI scratch pad, i.e. at address `0x10900000000` plus 

> `0x100000000` times the number of instructions in the transaction. Its purpose 

Reviewer 8: Can this be a static location? Removes a math operation to get the  cpi scratchpad ptr

is for programs to write CPI instruction data directly to it and avoid copies.

### VM initialization

During the initilization of the virtual machine, the runtime must load the 
value `0x400000000` in register `R1`, value `0x500000000` in register `R2`, 
and value `0x600000000` in register `R3`. These values represent addresses for 
programs to easily find the areas to read information about the transaction 
and the instructions.

### Changes to syscalls

Changes to the account metadata must now be communicated with specific 
syscalls, as detailed below:

> - `sol_assign_owner`: Dst account, new owner as `&[u8; 32]`

Reviewer 8: This sys-call makes the owner field volitile and prevents references to it from a program writing perspective. Still working on a way around this, but may require changing the signature to take in a pointer to the owner field to make it non-volitile (cpi still has issues here though).

Reviewer 6: > may require changing the signature to take in a pointer to the owner field to make it non-volitile (cpi still has issues here though).

That is a relevant point. I think we can change it to be a pointer yes.

Regarding `sol_transfer_lamports`, would making the parameter a pointer also help? Or could we get around using volatile there?

Reviewer 8: I was thinking through this and I think the only solution due to the volatile memory is to make a comparison syscall as @febo described. Otherwise there will always have to be a copy of the owner field. The other method would be to change the api to be non-voltile on the owner field and owner updates must be obtained from another syscall.

- For each account in instruction:
  - `InstructionAccount`, consisting of:
    - Index to transaction account: `u16`
      - Signer flag: `u8` (1 for signer, 0 for non-singer)
      - Writable flag: `u8` (1 for writable, 0 for readonly)

### VM initialization

During the initilization of the virtual machine, the runtime must load the 
value `0x400000000` in register `R1`, value `0x500000000` in register `R2`, 
and value `0x600000000` in register `R3`. These values represent addresses for 
programs to easily find the areas to read information about the transaction 
and the instructions.

### Changes to syscalls

Changes to the account metadata must now be communicated with specific 
syscalls, as detailed below:

- `sol_assign_owner`: Dst account, new owner as `&[u8; 32]`
- `sol_transfer_lamports`: Dst account, src account, amount as `u64`

The account parameters are the index of the account in the transaction.

Changes to the account payload length and all the scratchpads sections 
introduced in this SIMD (the return-data scratchpad and the CPI scratchpad) 
must be communicated via a new sycall `set_buffer_length`, with the following 
parameters:

> - Address of region to be resized: `u64`

Reviewer 6: It should be only the base address. You are right.

metadata with the provided syscalls (see the `Changes to syscalls` section).
The contents for this region are as follow:

- For each transaction account:
  - Key: `[u8; 32]`
  - Owner: `[u8; 32]`
  - Lamports: `u64`
  - Account payload: `&[u8]` which is composed of:
    - Pointer to account payload: `u64`
    - Account payload length: `u64`

#### Instruction area

For each transaction, the program runtime must also prepare two memory regions. 
The first one is a readonly region starting at `0x600000000`. It must be 
updated at each CPI call edge. The contents of this region are the following:

- For each instruction in transaction:
  - Reserved filed for alignment and potential future usage: `u16`
  - Index in transaction of program account to be executed: `u16`
  - CPI nesting level: `u16`
  - Index of parent instruction (`u32::MAX` for top-level instructions): `u16`
  - Reference to a slice of instruction accounts `&[InstructionAccount]`, 
    consisting of:
    - Pointer to slice: `u64`
    - Number of elements in slice: `u64`
  - Instruction data `&[u8]`, which is composed of:
    - Pointer to data: `u64`
    - Length of data: `u64`

> Let `InstrucionAccount` contain the following fields:

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Let `InstructionAccount` contain the following fields:
```

  - Index to transaction account: `u16`
  - Signer flag: `u8` (1 for signer, 0 for non-singer)
  - Writable flag: `u8` (1 for writable, 0 for readonly)

#### Return data scratchpad

A writable memory region starting at `0x700000000` must be mapped in for the
return-data scratchpad.

### Accounts area

For each unique (meaning deduplicated) instruction account the payload must
be mapped in at `0x800000000` plus `0x100000000` times the index of the

> **transaction** account (not the index of the instruction account). Only if the

Reviewer 6: One of the core tenets behind ABIv2 was to reduce fees to a minimum. One way to achieve this is to share the same data structures between the validator and programs without any need to re-organize them. The validator loads accounts for the transaction and uses the account index in transaction for most operations, hence the idea to unify accounts around such an index.

Converting from index in instruction to index in transaction has a cost to the validator too. (1)

> Densely packed account headers in read-only region at 0x500000000, laid out via instruction account index, without pointer to account region (40 bytes per instruction account)

Doing this requires sorting the accounts in a dense area for each top level instruction and twice for each CPI. (2)

> what about simply shifting around the ### Accounts area addressing so that account payloads are in same order as instruction area?

This idea means that we cannot maintain the address space constant throughout the transaction. Consequently, we need to re-create it for each top-level instruction and twice for each CPI. (3)

Doing either (1), (2), (3), or any mix between them entails higher base costs and a possible cost per account in both top level and CPI instructions. That may offset any gains you might have from a predictable address space.

The question we should be discussing is whether it is worth adopting a suggestion that helps your use case, and potentially someone else's, while raising CU costs for everybody.

> And as far as the instruction serialization schema, I don't know if it is strictly necessary to re-serialize everything; the existing #### Instruction area section should already work fine except for the fat pointers to the non-deterministic payload area: in this case, what about simply shifting around the ### Accounts area addressing so that account payloads are in same order as instruction area?

Another point this might bring confusion is the fact that the index of account in transaction would be used for accessing the account metadata and passed on to CPI, but the access of the account payload would have to use the index of the account in the instruction. I believed a unified index is more straightforward.

It is worth pointing too that the layout in this proposal obviates the syscall `GetProcessedSiblingInstruction`, since all instructions are provided, together with all the accounts metadata. Reordering accounts by index in instruction would need an effort to rethink this idea.

instruction account has the writable flag set and is owned by the current
program it is mapped in as a writable region. The writability of a region must
be updated as programs through out the transaction modify the account metadata.

The runtime must only map the payload for accounts that belong in the current
executing instruction. The payload for accounts belonging to sibling instructions
must NOT be mapped.

### Instruction payload area

For each instruction, the runtime must map its payload at address 
`0x10800000000` plus `0x100000000` times the index of the instruction in the 

> trasaction. All instruction payload mappings are readonly.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
transaction. All instruction payload mappings are readonly.
```

  instructions): `u32`
- Number of CPIs in trace (under execution and finished): `u32`
- The number of transaction accounts: `u32`

#### Account metadata area

This region starts at `0x500000000`, is readonly and holds the metadata for 
all accounts in the transaction. It is shared by all instructions running 
programs with support for ABIv2, and must be updated as instruction modify the 
metadata with the provided syscalls (see the `Changes to syscalls` section).
The contents for this region are as follow:

- For each transaction account:
  - Key: `[u8; 32]`
  - Owner: `[u8; 32]`
  - Lamports: `u64`
  - Account payload: `&[u8]` which is composed of:
    - Pointer to account payload: `u64`
    - Account payload length: `u64`

#### Instruction area

For each transaction, the program runtime must also prepare two memory regions. 
The first one is a readonly region starting at `0x600000000`. It must be 
updated at each CPI call edge. The contents of this region are the following:

- For each instruction in transaction:
  - Reserved filed for alignment and potential future usage: `u16`
  - Index in transaction of program account to be executed: `u16`
  - CPI nesting level: `u16`

>   - Index of parent instruction (`u32::MAX` for top-level instructions): `u16`

Reviewer 7: nit: small typo.
```suggestion
  - Index of parent instruction (`u16::MAX` for top-level instructions): `u16`
```

area to be the CPI scratch pad, i.e. at address `0x10800000000` plus 
`0x100000000` times the number of instructions in the transaction. Its purpose  
is for programs to write CPI instruction data directly to it and avoid copies.

### Instruction accounts area

For each instruction, the runtime must map an array of `InstructionAccount`
(as previously defined) at address `0x14800000000` plus `0x100000000` times 
the index of the instruction in the transaction. This mapped are is readonly.

Each of these memory regions contain the following for each instruction:

- For each account in instruction:
  - `InstructionAccount`, consisting of:
    - Index to transaction account: `u16`
      - Signer flag: `u8` (1 for signer, 0 for non-singer)
      - Writable flag: `u8` (1 for writable, 0 for readonly)

### Sysvar accounts area

For each existing (non deprecated) sysvar account, the runtime must map its
payload at address `0x18800000000` plus `0x100000000` times the index of the
sysvar in the following order:

0. Clock
1. Epoch rewards
2. Epoch Schdule
3. Last restart slot
4. Rent
5. Slot hashes
6. Stake history

### VM initialization

> During the initilization of the virtual machine, the runtime must load the 

Reviewer 7: Couple of ideas for this:

1. We could also add the pointer to the instruction data (R4) and length of it (R5).
2. I wonder if having only R1 is enough – the other pointers and lengths can be computed with a static offset from R1, so we can "save" those register to other use.

same CU per byte ratio as the `memset` syscall.

The verifier must reject SBPFv4 programs containing the `sol_invoke_signed_c` 
and `sol_invoke_signed_rust`, since they are not compatible with ABIv2. A new 
syscall `sol_invoke_signed_v2` must replace them. The parameters for 
`sol_invoke_signed_v2` are the following:

- Index in transaction of program ID to be called: `u64`.
- A pointer to a slice `&[InstructionAccount]`, with each element 
  `InstructionAccount` 
  containing, as previously mentioned:
  - Index to transaction account: `u16`
    - Signer flag: `u8` (1 for signer, 0 for non-singer)
    - Writable flag: `u8` (1 for writable, 0 for readonly)
- The length of the `&[InstructionAccount]` slice.
- A pointer to the singer seeds of type `&[&[&[u8]]]`.
- The length of the outer signer seeds slice in `&[&[&[u8]]]`.

Programs using `sol_get_return_data` and `sol_set_return_data` must be 
rejected by the verfier if ABI v2 is in use.

### Scratchpad management

This SIMD introduces two scratch pad regions: the return-data scratchpad and 
the CPI scratchpad. At the beginning of every instruction, these scratchpads 
must be empty and their size must be zero.

> Programs must set the desired length for them using the `set_buffer_length` 

Reviewer 7: Since it is possible to statically determine the maximum length for the return-data scratchpad, one alternative is to always have `MAX_RETURN_DATA` bytes allocated. Programs then write as many bytes as they need, prefixing with the length if needed, without having to set the length. This might save a syscall call on the program side.

syscall. Reads and writes to a region beyond the scratchpad length must 
trigger an access violation error.

The management for the writable accounts payload must work similarly, except 
that they must not be initialized empty, but instead with the pre-existing 
data it holds.

### CPIs

With ABIv2 and the new `sol_invoke_signed_v2` syscall, CPIs must be managed 
differently. At each CPI call, the runtime must perform the following actions:

> 1. Verify that all account indexes received in the `InstructionAccount` array 

Reviewer 7: Also need to verify signer and writable flags to make sure accounts are not having their privileges "promoted".

readonly memory region starting at `0x400000000`. This region is shared by all 
instructions running programs with support to new ABI. It must be updated as
as instructions through out the transaction modify the CPI scratchpad or the 
return data. The contents of this memory region are the following:

- Key of the program which wrote to the return-data scratchpad most 
  recently: `[u8; 32]`
- The return-data scratchpad: `&[u8]`, which is composed of:
  - Pointer to return-data scratchpad: `u64`
  - Length of return-data scratchpad: `u64`
- The CPI scratchpad: `&[u8]`, which consists of:
  - Pointer to CPI scratchpad: `u64`
  - Length of CPI scratchpad: `u64`
- The CPI accounts scratchpad: `&[InstructionAccount]`, which consists of:
    - Pointer to slice: `u64`
    - Number of elements in slice: `u64`
- Index of current executing instruction: `u32`
- Total number of instructions in transaction (including CPIs and top level 
  instructions): `u32`
- Number of CPIs in trace (under execution and finished): `u32`
- The number of transaction accounts: `u32`

#### Account metadata area

This region starts at `0x500000000`, is readonly and holds the metadata for 

> all accounts in the transaction. It is shared by all instructions running 

Reviewer 7: It would be good to mention that instructions will have access to the fee payer account metadata (i.e., first account on the transaction).

The contents for this region are as follow:

- For each transaction account:
  - Key: `[u8; 32]`
  - Owner: `[u8; 32]`
  - Lamports: `u64`
  - Account payload: `&[u8]` which is composed of:
    - Pointer to account payload: `u64`
    - Account payload length: `u64`

#### Instruction area

For each transaction, the program runtime must also prepare two memory regions. 
The first one is a readonly region starting at `0x600000000`. It must be 
updated at each CPI call edge. The contents of this region are the following:

- For each instruction in transaction:
  - Reserved filed for alignment and potential future usage: `u16`
  - Index in transaction of program account to be executed: `u16`
  - CPI nesting level: `u16`
  - Index of parent instruction (`u16::MAX` for top-level instructions): `u16`
  - Reference to a slice of instruction accounts `&[InstructionAccount]`, 
    consisting of:
    - Pointer to slice: `u64`
    - Number of elements in slice: `u64`
  - Instruction data `&[u8]`, which is composed of:
    - Pointer to data: `u64`
    - Length of data: `u64`

Let `InstructionAccount` contain the following fields:

  - Index to transaction account: `u16`

>   - Signer flag: `u8` (1 for signer, 0 for non-singer)

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
  - Signer flag: `u8` (1 for signer, 0 for non-signer)
```

   execution (see section [Instruction payload area](#instruction-payload-area)).
5. Register R5: The payload lenght for the instruction under execution.

### Changes to syscalls

Changes to the account metadata must now be communicated with specific 
syscalls, as detailed below:

- `sol_assign_owner`: Dst account, new owner as `&[u8; 32]`
- `sol_transfer_lamports`: Dst account, src account, amount as `u64`

The account parameters are the index of the account in the transaction.

Changes to the account payload length and all the scratchpads sections 
introduced in this SIMD (the return-data scratchpad and the CPI scratchpad) 
must be communicated via a new sycall `set_buffer_length`, with the following 
parameters:

- Base address of region to be resized: `u64`
- New length of region: `u64`

The syscall must check if the address matches the base address of either a 
writable account payload mapping or one of the scratchpad mappings and return 
an error otherwise. Constrains for the maximum resizable limits must also be 
verified for each region separetely.

The `set_buffer_length` must charge a base cost (to be determined) plus the 

> same CU per byte ratio as the `memset` syscall.

Reviewer 10: While implementing this I found the specification to be insufficient here. The obvious interpretation would be to charge the per-byte fee for the additional bytes that are being allocated (and not at all if the buffer size is being reduced) as those are the only bytes that need memsetting to 0.

At the same time, any increase in buffer size may require a `realloc` and `memcpy` from previous buffer to the new one. So charging `per_byte * new_length` any time the buffer size would increase (`new_length > current_length`) would seem like a more correct option. I think we can get away with a single fee here, as the cost of `memcpy` and `memset` is in roughly the same ballpark.

Question is: are we okay with charging a significant fee when the buffer is being resized? This fee can be especially painful to resizes where the base buffer is large and is only increased in size by a little bit every time, but it would correctly reflect the computation load.

EDIT: Alternative to charging for reallocations would be to maintain a pre-allocated pool of buffers such that each region already gets a buffer that's at least as large as needed to contain the largest region requestable. I don't think that's feasible, though, especially not an outlook of having buffers larger than 10MiB.

Reviewer 6: > So charging per_byte * new_length any time the buffer size would increase (new_length > current_length) would seem like a more correct option. I think we can get away with a single fee here, as the cost of memcpy and memset is in roughly the same ballpark.

I believe charging for the entire new size during account growths is the right solution for now. If we can come up with another implementation on the validator side that allows us to decrease costs, we can do so later.

Decreasing costs is always easier than increasing them.

metadata with the provided syscalls (see the `Changes to syscalls` section).
The contents for this region are as follow:

- For each transaction account:
  - Key: `[u8; 32]`
  - Owner: `[u8; 32]`
  - Lamports: `u64`
  - Account payload: `&[u8]` which is composed of:
    - Pointer to account payload: `u64`
    - Account payload length: `u64`

#### Instruction area

For each transaction, the program runtime must also prepare two memory regions. 
The first one is a readonly region starting at `0x600000000`. It must be 
updated at each CPI call edge. The contents of this region are the following:

- For each instruction in transaction:
  - Reserved filed for alignment and potential future usage: `u16`
  - Index in transaction of program account to be executed: `u16`
  - CPI nesting level: `u16`
  - Index of parent instruction (`u16::MAX` for top-level instructions): `u16`
  - Reference to a slice of instruction accounts `&[InstructionAccount]`, 
    consisting of:
    - Pointer to slice: `u64`
    - Number of elements in slice: `u64`
  - Instruction data `&[u8]`, which is composed of:
    - Pointer to data: `u64`
    - Length of data: `u64`

> Let `InstructionAccount` contain the following fields:

Reviewer 7: @LucasSte Is the slice of `[InstructionAccount]` in a writable-memory region? We need to track borrows for duplicated accounts and using `Rc` requires heap allocation. Ideally we can have a byte somewhere so programs can use a "manual" reference counting.

update: We will use the heap reserved space to do the tracking, so all good here.

  - Index to transaction account: `u16`
  - Signer flag: `u8` (1 for signer, 0 for non-signer)
  - Writable flag: `u8` (1 for writable, 0 for readonly)

>   - Pointer to the account metadata: `u64` (see [Account metadata area]

Reviewer 7: @LucasSte We need to add some padding bytes (`[u8; 4]`) here to the `u64` value is aligned.

Author: Hm, not sure using the VM ptr is the right thing here to begin with. This originally was a `u16` index, which is what the program runtime internally uses. The runtime does not work on VM ptrs and that would also make no sense as converting them back is the same amount of work as converting them forward. This is another case of the same work either being on the program runtime side or the program side. The VM ptr approach does increase memory traffic 4 times.

Reviewer 6: The index in transaction is still there, so this change is not suggesting the runtime to use the VM pointer. The VM pointer is easily calculated by runtime and surfacing this information to programs is beneficial, since they save CUs, when accessing the account metadata.

> The runtime does not work on VM ptrs and that would also make no sense as converting them back is the same amount of work as converting them forward

The pointer is just base address + idx*region_size. What am I missing?

> The VM ptr approach does increase memory traffic 4 times.

Can you elaborate more on this?

Author: > The pointer is just base address + idx*region_size

Exactly, the conversion is very simple, programs can do it on their own.

> Can you elaborate more on this?

Storing a 64 bit pointer bloats the instruction account structure and means a whole lot more data must be written (and read) per instruction (also caused by additional padding requirements).

Other VMs also have to deal with this general problem, key word is "pointer compression":
- https://v8.dev/blog/pointer-compression
- https://v8.dev/blog/oilpan-pointer-compression
- https://wiki.openjdk.org/spaces/HotSpot/pages/11829259/CompressedOops
- https://spidermonkey.dev/blog/2025/01/15/is-memory64-actually-worth-using.html

Reviewer 6: > Exactly, the conversion is very simple, programs can do it on their own.

Likewise, runtime can do it for free.

> Storing a 64 bit pointer bloats the instruction account structure and means a whole lot more data must be written (and read) per instruction (also caused by additional padding requirements).

I don't think 16 bytes (in total per account) is anything to worry about. We write a lot more than that for other data structures. Perhaps, the impact of this change can be benchmarked to determine if it harms runtime performance.

We could try decreasing the page alignment from 4GB to 2GB or 1GB, so that addresses fit in a u32.

Author: As discussed, this won't be enough savings to get to 32 bit pointers. You would still end up with a 6 byte pointer, which is a thing on some architectures (as they ignore the high bits).

Reviewer 6: Right, I'll remove the pointer field for now.

Reviewer 6: Returning to this topic, I'm still thinking that this change is beneficial. It provides developers with direct access to memory.

> The VM ptr approach does increase memory traffic 4 times.

Although the size of the structure increases, we must keep in mind that the bottleneck today is memory translation, and the VM is not the bottleneck in the validator. That means a developer focused approach might be rewarding for Solana in the long term.

Instead of just fixing sysvars at specific addresses it might be of more
general interest to resolve a pubkey to transaction account index without
having to scan the transaction account list. This might also be useful to
programs which hold pubkeys in the payload of accounts and need to match them
against the current transaction. Additionally, fixing account indices poses
an obstacle to other protocol users of the SVM when expanding the set of
sysvars as the same index can then collide in different protocols.

## New Terminology

None.

## Detailed Design

Programs signal that they expect ABIv2 through their SBPF version field being
v4 or above.

### Memory Regions

The virtual address space layout is split into memory regions, each 4 GiB in
size, starting at the following addresses:

- `0x000000000`: SBPFv3 program read only data
- `0x100000000`: SBPFv3 program byte code
- `0x200000000`: SBPFv3 stack
- `0x300000000`: SBPFv3 heap
- `0x400000000`: [Transaction metadata](#transaction-metadata)
- `0x500000000`: [Transaction account](#transaction-account)
- `0x600000000`: [Instruction trace](#instruction-trace)
- `0x700000000`: [Return data scratchpad](#return-data-scratchpad)

> - `0x800000000 + transactin_account_index * 0x100000000`: [Transaction account payload](#transaction-account-payload)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- `0x800000000 + transaction_account_index * 0x100000000`: [Transaction account payload](#transaction-account-payload)
```

> - `0x800000000 + transaction_account_index * 0x100000000`: [Transaction account payload](#transaction-account-payload)

Reviewer 11: Just curious - Is there a reason this is `0x800000000 + transaction_account_index * 0x100000000` and not  `0x800000000 + instruction_account_index * 0x100000000`?

From a program perspective it seems more intuitive to reason about the instruction account list, not the transaction account list.

Maybe I'm wrong tho, just wanted to ask 😄

Author: Two reasons:
1. On the runtime side it would result in more churn, having to remap all these for every single instruction instead of once per transaction.
2. Instruction accounts can be duplicate, transaction accounts can not. So, on the program side it would become problematic as Rust does not support references to aliasing memory regions.

Reviewer 10: How terrible would it be if we wanted to move the account payloads to start at `0` and shift everything else to go after them? It would allow conversions between transaction index and payload to be a plain shift by 32, without needing to add/subtract a `0x800000000`?

Reviewer 12: If you just told the "muh large accounts" people to kick rocks and did 16mb alignment, this would work great and fit in a single region.

Author: > How terrible would it be if we wanted to move the account payloads to start at 0 and shift everything else to go after them? It would allow conversions between transaction index and payload to be a plain shift by 32, without needing to add/subtract a 0x800000000?

We could, it would however displace the four memory regions defined by SBPF to somewhere else. Wanted to avoid that.

> 16mb alignment, this would work great and fit in a single region.

The 4GiB alignment is merely to continue with the spacing between memory regions that SBPF does. We can choose any other alignment if that is beneficial. The transaction account metadata, instruction trace, return data etc. being on different memory regions however is on purpose (not because of size / space limitations): This allows the underlying allocations on the host side to be resized and not cause shifting in the virtual address space. Alternatively, we could also pad them to a max size, but that limit would then be set in stone.

Reviewer 12: Right, my comment was simply to say that if we were to hard commit to the current 10MiB limit (or very slightly larger) that 16MiB would fit cleanly within a single 4GiB region for up to 256 accounts, which would make @nagisa's idea totally feasible without displacing other regions.

Reviewer 10: Having thought about this a bit, we would have to displace the read-only data region no matter what. This would mean having to come out with SBPFv4 that is aware of the new addressing/linking requirements for the program code there... At that point there is no reason why we couldn't move all of the sbpf regions as needed.

This could have been somewhat possible to hack around if the data and program code were swapped, because there isn't actually a good reason why any sbpf program would need to read back its own code (and ip-relative addressing is not possible anyway due to ebpf not exposing the ip register.)

Reviewer 12: So what? The idea that we need some kind of "strict headers" rule is nonsense. We can just revert that change in v3 and nothing would break. There are some reasons why an sbpf program would want to read its own bytecode, but i'll spare you the details. The current toolchain implementation of ABIv2 is already using v4 btw.

This limits the maximum number of the following we could ever support:

- Accounts (including sysvars) in a transaction to 4088
- Accounts in an instruction to 65536
- Instructions in a transaction to 64
- Bytes in the instruction payload to 4 GiB
- Bytes in the account payload to 4 GiB

#### Transaction metadata

At the beginning of a transaction the program runtime must prepare a readonly
memory region. This region is shared by all instructions running programs with
support to new ABI. It must be updated as as instructions through out the
transaction modify the CPI scratchpad or the return data. The contents of this
memory region are the following:

- Public key / address of the program which wrote to the return-data scratchpad
  most recently: `[u8; 32]`
- The return-data scratchpad: `&[u8]`, which is composed of:
  - Pointer to return-data scratchpad: `u64`
  - Length of return-data scratchpad: `u64`
- The CPI scratchpad: `&[u8]`, which consists of:
  - Pointer to CPI scratchpad: `u64`
  - Length of CPI scratchpad: `u64`
- The CPI accounts scratchpad: `&[InstructionAccount]`, which consists of:
  - Pointer to slice: `u64`
  - Number of elements in slice: `u64`

> - Index of current executing instruction: `u32`

Reviewer 7: This value being a `u32` is inconsistent with the `u16` "Index of parent instruction" in the instruction trace. We should have both values as `u16` and add padding here.
```suggestion
- Index of current executing instruction: `u16`
- Reserved field for alignment and potential future usage: `u16`
```

Reviewer 6: There was an inconsistency in the types for the metadata area. I updated all types to u16, maintaining the 8-byte alignment in https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/177/commits/972ae0be4e930318760321c490ac2236934321e0.

  instructions): `u32`
- Number of CPIs in trace (under execution and finished): `u32`
- The number of transaction accounts: `u32`

As accounts in this area sorted by their index in transaction, the payer
account must always be the account at index zero, as we surface the internal
account ordering to programs.

#### Transaction account

This memory region is readonly and holds the metadata for all accounts in the
transaction. It is shared by all instructions running programs with support for
ABIv2, and must be updated as instruction modify the metadata with the provided
syscalls (see the `Changes to syscalls` section). The contents for this region
are as follow:

- For each `TransactionAccount`:
  - Public key / address of itself: `[u8; 32]`
  - Public key / address of the owner: `[u8; 32]`
  - Lamports: `u64`
  - [Transaction account payload](#transaction-account-payload): `&[u8]`
  which consists of:
    - Pointer to account payload: `u64`
    - Account payload length: `u64`

#### Instruction trace

This memory region is readonly and must be updated at each intruction
invocation. The contents of this region are the following:

- For each instruction in transaction:

>   - Reserved filed for alignment and potential future usage: `u16`

Reviewer 7: Typo?
```suggestion
  - Reserved field for alignment and potential future usage: `u16`
```

  - Index of parent instruction (`u16::MAX` for top-level instructions): `u16`
  - Reference to a slice of instruction accounts `&[InstructionAccount]`,
    consisting of:
    - Pointer to slice: `u64`
    - Number of elements in slice: `u64`
  - Instruction payload `&[u8]`, which is composed of:
    - Pointer to data: `u64`
    - Length of data: `u64`

#### Return data scratchpad

This memory region holds the return-data of the transaction and starts out as
readonly but can temporarily become writable until the next instruction edge.
When it becomes writable the corresponding fields in
[Transaction metadata](#transaction-metadata) must be updated.
See [Scratchpad management](#scratchpad-management).

#### Transaction account payload

For each transaction account one separate memory region must be mapped to its
data (as opposed to its metadata).

Only if the instruction account has the writable flag set and is owned by the
current program it is mapped in as writable. The writability of a region must
be updated as programs through out the transaction modify the account metadata
or as the program (and thus owner relation) changes between instructions.

#### Instruction payload

> For each transaction account one separate readonly memory region must be mapped
> to its data (as opposed to its metadata).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
For each instruction, one separate readonly memory region must be mapped for its payload.
```

    - Pointer to account payload: `u64`
    - Account payload length: `u64`

#### Return data scratchpad

A writable memory region starting at `0x500000000` must be mapped in for the
return-data scratchpad.

#### Instruction area

For each transction, the program runtime must also preapre two memory regions. 
The first one is a readonly region starting at `0x600000000`. It must be 
updated at each CPI call edge. The contents of this region are the following:

- For each instruction in transaction:

>   - Program ID: `[u8; 32]`

Reviewer 6: Fixed

### Changes to syscalls

The `AccountInfo` parameter of the CPI syscall `sol_invoke_signed_c` must be
ignored and programs using `sol_invoke_signed_rust` must be rejected if ABI v2
is in use. Instead the changes to account metadata will be communicated
explicitly through separate syscalls:

- `sol_resize_account`: Dst account, new length as `u64`
- `sol_assign_owner`: Dst account, new owner as `&[u8; 32]`
- `sol_transfer_lamports`: Dst account, src account, amount as `u64`

The account parameters are guest pointers to the structure of the transaction

> accounts (see per transaction serialization).

Reviewer 6: That would free us from having a strict data structure for those accounts and may also avoid address translation. In addition, the SDK and pinocchio don't need to use the same data structure for instruction accounts and transaction accounts. Indeed, the initial idea is to eagerly deserialize the instruction accounts and lazily read the transaction account when necessary.

`sol_invoke_signed_v2` are the following:

- Index in transaction of program ID to be called: `u64`.
- A pointer to a slice `&[InstructionAccount]`, with each element 
  `InstructionAccount` 
  containing, as previously mentioned:
  - Index to transaction account: `u16`
    - Signer flag: `u8` (1 for signer, 0 for non-singer)
    - Writable flag: `u8` (1 for writable, 0 for readonly)
- The length of the `&[InstructionAccount]` slice.
- A pointer to the singer seeds of type `&[&[&[u8]]]`.

> - The length of the outer signer seeds slice in `&[&[&[u8]]]`.

Reviewer 6: I was trying to maintain compatibility with `sol_invoke_signed_rust`. Is there anything about it that you don't like?

> - The length of the outer signer seeds slice in `&[&[&[u8]]]`.

Reviewer 7: Hmmm, I see. The issue is that Rust slices don't have a stable layout so not sure if this can end up being a problem later. Maybe we should go with how `sol_invoke_signed_c` works?

> - The length of the outer signer seeds slice in `&[&[&[u8]]]`.

Reviewer 7: @LucasSte As per our conversation, would be nice to update the `&[&[&[u8]]]` to reflect the actual layout of the type. We can use the idea of having `Signer` and `Seed` types.
